About The Sodor Processor Collection
====================================

Author  : Christopher Celio (celio@eecs.berkeley.edu)

Author  : Eric Love

Date    : 2014 May 6

Diagrams: [Sodor Github wiki](https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-sodor/wiki)


This repo has been put together to demonstrate a number of simple [RISC-V](http://riscv.org)
integer pipelines written in [Chisel](http://chisel.eecs.berkeley.edu):

* 1-stage (essentially an ISA simulator)
* 2-stage (demonstrates pipelining in Chisel)
* 3-stage (uses sequential memory; supports both Harvard and Princeton versions)
* 5-stage (can toggle between fully bypassed or fully interlocked)
* "bus"-based micro-coded implementation

All of the cores implement the RISC-V 32b integer base user-level ISA (RV32I)
version 2.0. None of the cores support virtual memory, and thus only implement
the Machine-level (M-mode) of the Privileged ISA v1.10 .

All processors talk to a simple scratchpad memory (asynchronous,
single-cycle), with no backing outer memory (the 3-stage is the exception
\- its scratchpad is synchronous). Programs are loaded in via a Debug Transport Module
 (DTM) described in [Debug Spec v0.13](https://static.dev.sifive.com/riscv-debug-spec-0.13.b4f1f43.pdf) port (while the core is kept in reset), effectively making the
scratchpads 3-port memories (instruction, data, debug).

This repository is set up to use the Verilog file generated by Chisel3 which is fed
to Verilator along with a test harness in C++ to generate and run the Sodor emulators.

This repo works great as an undergraduate lab (and has been used by Berkeley's
CS152 class for 3 semesters and counting). See doc/ for an example, as well as
for some processor diagrams. Be careful though - admittedly some of those
documents may become dated as things like the Privileged ISA evolve.



Getting the repo
================
```bash
git clone https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-sodor.git
cd riscv-sodor
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

Building the processor emulators
================================

Because this repository is designed to be used as RISC-V processor
examples written in [Chisel3](https://github.com/freechipsproject/chisel3/wiki) (and a regressive testsuite for Chisel updates),
no external [RISC-V tools](http://riscv.org) are used (with the exception of
the RISC-V [front-end server](https://github.com/codelec/riscv-fesvr) and
optionally, the [spike-dasm](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-run) binary to
provide a disassembly of instructions in the generated *.out files).
The assumption is that [riscv-gnu-toolchain](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain) is not
available on the local system.  Thus, RISC-V unit tests and benchmarks were
compiled and committed to the sodor repository in the ./install directory (as are the .dump files).

Install verilator using any of the following possible ways
For Ubuntu 17.04
```bash
sudo apt install pkg-config verilator
#optionally gtkwave to view waveform dumps
```

For Ubuntu 16.10 and lower
```bash 
sudo apt install pkg-config
wget http://mirrors.kernel.org/ubuntu/pool/universe/v/verilator/verilator_3.900-1_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i verilator_3.900-1_amd64.deb
```

If you don't have enough permissions to use apt on your machine
```bash
# make autoconf g++ flex bison should be available
wget https://www.veripool.org/ftp/verilator-3.906.tgz
tar -xzf verilator-3.906.tgz
cd verilator-3.906
unset VERILATOR_ROOT
./configure
make
export VERILATOR_ROOT=$PWD
export PATH=$PATH:$VERILATOR_ROOT/bin
```

Install the RISC-V front-end server to talk between the host and RISC-V target processors.
```bash
cd riscv-fesvr
mkdir build; cd build
../configure --prefix=/usr/local
make install 
```

Build the sodor emulators
```bash
./configure --with-riscv=/usr/local
make
# To run the all the stages with the given tests available in ./install
make run-emulator
# To install the executables on the local system
make install
# Clean all generated files
make clean
```
(Although you can set the prefix to any directory of your choice, they must be
the same directory for both riscv-fesvr and riscv-sodor).

(Alternative) Build together with Chisel sources
------------------------------------------------

This repository packages [SBT](http://github.com/harrah/xsbt/wiki/Getting-Started-Setup)
(Scala Built Tool) for convenience.  By default SBT will fetch the Chisel
package specified in project/build.scala.

If you are a developer of Chisel and are using sodor cores to test your changes
to the Chisel repository, it is convenient to rebuild the Chisel package before
building the sodor cores. To do that, fetch the Chisel repo from github and pass 
the path to the local Chisel source directory to the configure script.

    $ git clone https://github.com/ucb-bar/chisel.git
    $ cd riscv-sodor
    $ ./configure --with-riscv=/usr/local --with-chisel=../chisel
    $ make

Creating a source release package
=================================

    $ make dist-src


Running the RISC-V tests
========================

    $ make run-emulator

Gathering the results
---------------------

    (all)   $ make reports
    (cpi)   $ make reports-cpi
    (bp)    $ make reports-bp
    (stats) $ make reports-stats

(Optional) Running debug version to produce signal traces
---------------------------------------------------------
```bash
make run-emulator-debug
```
When run in debug mode, all processors will generate .vcd information (viewable
by your favorite waveform viewer). All processors can also spit out cycle-by-cycle 
log information.
Although already done for you by the build system, to generate .vcd files, see
 emulator/common/Makefile.include to add the "-v${vcdfilename}" flag to the
emulator-debug binary.

RISC-V fesvr allows you to use elf as input to sodor cores so no need to generate
the hex files

Have fun!

The riscv-test Collection
=========================

Sodor includes a submodule link to the "riscv-tests" repository. To help Sodor
users, the tests and benchmarks have been pre-compiled and placed in the
./install directory.

Building a RV32I Toolchain
--------------------------

If you would like to compile your own tests, you will need to build an
RV32I compiler. Set $RISCV to where you would like to install RISC-V related
tools, and make sure that $RISCV/bin is in your path.
```bash
git clone git@github.com:riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain.git
cd riscv-gnu-toolchain
mkdir build; cd build
../configure --prefix=$RISCV --with-arch=rv32i
make install
```
This will install a compiler named riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc, complete with
newlib libraries that will only emit integer instructions. More advanced users
will want to consult the riscv-gnu-toolchain README regarding multilib support
for different base ISAs.

Compiling the tests yourself
----------------------------
```bash
    cd riscv-tests/isa
    make
```
This will compile ALL RISC-V assembly tests (32b and 64b). Sodor only supports
the rv32ui-p (user-level) and rv32mi-p (machine-level) physical memory tests.
```bash
    cd riscv-tests/benchmarks
    make
```
You will need to modify the Makefile in riscv-tests/benchmarks to compile RV32I
binaries.  By default, it will compile RV64G. If you compiled a pure RV32I
compiler, then you may only need to change the name of the compiler used
(riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc).  If your toolchain supports multiple ISAs, then you
may need to specify "-m32 --with-arch=RV32I" for the compiler and linker flags
as appropriate.

Running tests on the ISA simulator
----------------------------------

If you would like to run tests yourself, you can use the Spike ISA simulator
(found in riscv-tools on the riscv.org webpage). By default, Spike executes in
RV64G mode. To execute RV32I binaries, for example:

    cd ./install
    spike --ISA=RV32I rv32ui-p-simple
    spike --ISA=RV32I dhrystone.riscv

The generated assembly code looks too complex!
----------------------------------------------

For Sodor, the assembly tests rely on macros that can be found in the
riscv-tests/env/p directory. You can simplify these macros as desired.


FAQ
===

*What is the goal of these cores?*

First and foremost, to provide a set of easy to understand cores that users can
easily modify and play with. Sodor is useful both as a quick introduction to
the [RISC-V ISA](http://riscv.org) and to the hardware construction language
[Chisel3](http://chisel.eecs.berkeley.edu).

*Are there any diagrams of these cores?*

Diagrams of some of the processors can be found either in the
[Sodor Github wiki](https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-sodor/wiki), in doc/,
or in doc/lab1.pdf.  A more comprehensive write-up on the micro-code implementation can
be found at the [CS152 website](http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs152/sp12/handouts/microcode.pdf).


*How do I generate Verilog code for use on a FPGA?*

Chisel3 outputs verilog by default which can be generated by
```bash
cd emulator/rv32_1stage
make generated-src/Top.v
```

TODO
----

Here is an informal list of things that would be nice to get done. Feel free to
contribute!

* Reduce the port count on the scratchpad memory by having the HTIF port
  share one of the cpu ports.
* Provide a Verilog test harness, and put the 3-stage on a FPGA.
* Add support for the ma_addr, ma_fetch ISA tests. This requires detecting
  misaligned address exceptions.
* Greatly cleanup the common/csr.scala file, to make it clearer and more
  understandable.
* Refactor the stall, kill, fencei, and exception logic of the 5-stage to be
  more understandable.
* Update the u-code to properly handle illegal instructions (rv32mi-p-illegal)
  and to properly handle exceptions generated by the CSR file (rv32mi-p-csr).
